Building large
language models using
the transformer
architecture dramatically
improved the performance of
natural language tasks over
the earlier generation of RNNs,
and led to an explosion in
regenerative capability.
The power of the
transformer architecture
lies in its ability to
learn the relevance and context
of all of the words
in a sentence.
Not just as you see here,
to each word next
to its neighbor,
but to every other
word in a sentence.
To apply attention weights to
those relationships so that
the model learns the relevance
of each word to
each other words no matter
where they are in the input.
This gives the
algorithm the ability
to learn who has the book,
who could have the book,
and if it's even relevant
to the wider context
of the document.
These attention weights
are learned during
LLM training and you'll
learn more about this
later this week.
This diagram is called an
attention map and
can be useful to
illustrate the attention
weights between
each word and every other word.
Here in this stylized example,
you can see that the word book
is strongly connected with or
paying attention to
the word teacher
and the word student.
This is called
self-attention and
the ability to learn
a tension in this way
across the whole
input significantly
approves the model's
ability to encode language.
Now that you've seen one of
the key attributes of the
transformer architecture,
self-attention, let's cover at
a high level how
the model works.
Here's a simplified diagram of
the transformer architecture
so that you can
focus at a high level on
where these processes
are taking place.
The transformer architecture is
split into two distinct parts,
the encoder and the decoder.
These components work in
conjunction with each
other and they share a
number of similarities.
Also, note here, the
diagram you see is
derived from the
original attention
is all you need paper.
Notice how the inputs
to the model are at
the bottom and the
outputs are at the top,
where possible we'll try to
remain faithful to this
throughout the course.
Now, machine-learning models are
just big statistical calculators
and they work with
numbers, not words.
So before passing texts
into the model to process,
you must first
tokenize the words.
Simply put, this converts
the words into numbers,
with each number
representing a position in
a dictionary of all
the possible words
that the model can work with.
You can choose from multiple
tokenization methods.
For example, token IDs
matching two complete words,
or using token IDs to
represent parts of words.
As you can see here.
What's important is
that once you've
selected a tokenizer
to train the model,
you must use the same tokenizer
when you generate text.
Now that your input is
represented as numbers,
you can pass it to
the embedding layer.
This layer is a trainable
vector embedding space,
a high-dimensional space where
each token is represented as
a vector and occupies
a unique location
within that space.
Each token ID in the vocabulary
is matched to a
multi-dimensional vector,
and the intuition is that
these vectors learn to encode
the meaning and context of
individual tokens in
the input sequence.
Embedding vector spaces
have been used in
natural language
processing for some time,
previous generation
language algorithms
like Word2vec use this concept.
Don't worry if you're
not familiar with this.
You'll see examples of this
throughout the course,
and there are some links to
additional resources in
the reading exercises
at the end of this week.
Looking back at the
sample sequence,
you can see that in
this simple case,
each word has been
matched to a token ID,
and each token is
mapped into a vector.
In the original
transformer paper,
the vector size
was actually 512,
so much bigger than we
can fit onto this image.
For simplicity, if you imagine
a vector size of just three,
you could plot the words into
a three-dimensional space and
see the relationships
between those words.
You can see now how you
can relate words that are
located close to each other
in the embedding space,
and how you can
calculate the distance
between the words as an angle,
which gives the
model the ability
to mathematically
understand language.
As you add the
token vectors into
the base of the encoder
or the decoder,
you also add
positional encoding.
The model processes each of
the input tokens in parallel.
So by adding the
positional encoding,
you preserve the information
about the word order and don't
lose the relevance of
the position of the
word in the sentence.
Once you've summed
the input tokens
and the positional encodings,
you pass the resulting vectors
to the self-attention layer.
Here, the model analyzes
the relationships
between the tokens
in your input sequence.
As you saw earlier,
this allows the model to
attend to different parts of
the input sequence
to better capture
the contextual dependencies
between the words.
The self-attention
weights that are learned
during training and
stored in these layers
reflect the importance
of each word in
that input sequence to all
other words in the sequence.
But this does not
happen just once,
the transformer
architecture actually
has multi-headed self-attention.
This means that multiple sets
of self-attention weights or
heads are learned in
parallel independently
of each other.
The number of attention
heads included in
the attention layer varies
from model to model,
but numbers in the range
of 12-100 are common.
The intuition here is that
each self-attention head will
learn a different
aspect of language.
For example, one head may see
the relationship between
the people entities
in our sentence.
Whilst another head may focus
on the activity of the sentence.
Whilst yet another
head may focus on
some other properties such
as if the words rhyme.
It's important to note that
you don't dictate ahead of
time what aspects of
language the attention
heads will learn.
The weights of each
head are randomly
initialized and given sufficient
training data and time,
each will learn different
aspects of language.
While some attention maps
are easy to interpret,
like the examples discussed
here, others may not be.
Now that all of the
attention weights have
been applied to your input data,
the output is processed through
a fully-connected
feed-forward network.
The output of this layer is
a vector of logits
proportional to
the probability
score for each and
every token in the
tokenizer dictionary.
You can then pass these logits
to a final softmax layer,
where they are normalized into
a probability score
for each word.
This output includes
a probability
for every single word
in the vocabulary,
so there's likely to be
thousands of scores here.
One single token will have a
score higher than the rest.
This is the most likely
predicted token.
But as you'll see
later in the course,
there are a number of methods
that you can use to vary
the final selection from this
vector of probabilities.